>> Coming up on "Catalyst,"
harnessing the medicinal power
of cannabis.
>> Cannabis isn't just one drug.
It's potentially
200 drugs or more.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm standing in
a field of cannabis.
Now, we normally
think of marijuana
as a recreational drug.
But there's only one molecule
in cannabis that makes you high.
There are actually more than 100
other different and interesting
chemical substances
in these plants.
And they offer huge
medical potential,
because they might be able
to tap into one of the body's
natural systems, one that
runs on its own cannabis
like molecules and is key.
>> It is involved in memory.
It is involved in epilepsy.
It is involved in schizophrenia.
It is involved in a huge,
huge number of human diseases.
>> Understanding the medicinal
properties of these cannabis
compounds has been
a long time coming.
>> It is extremely difficult to
initiate a clinical trial with
an illicit drug.
>> While the science
may be scant,
the community has
already taken it up.
>> It's been 4 and 1/2 years
in the medicinal cannabis,
and for us, it's
been a huge change.
And yeah, I don't think
he'd still be here.
I really don't.
>> Now, researchers are applying
scientific rigor to convert
anecdote into data.
So we might fully and safely
harness the medicinal power
of cannabis.
>> It's a very exciting time
at the moment in the world
of medicinal cannabis.
>> Freedom!
>> Cannabis isn't just one drug.
It's potentially
200 drugs or more.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Cannabis is a versatile
plant, also known as hemp,
marijuana, and weed.
It's been used
throughout history
as a fiber, an intoxicant,
and a medicine.
>> For millennia, plants were
essentially the only source
of drugs.
We have actually written data
by Assyrians in the Middle East
then they used cannabis
for neurological diseases
3,000 years ago.
The wide use of
cannabis as a drug
was in India, in
China, and the Middle
East for thousands of years.
>> Queen Victoria used cannabis
tinctures for her period pain,
so she was actually an
enthusiast who enjoyed
the analgesic effects.
And really what you see is that
the extracts were very widely
used for all sorts of
different conditions.
>> By the time the 20th
century rolled in, cannabis had
acquired a very different image.
It was seen as a drug of
abuse and made illegal.
And as a result, there
was much less focus
on its medicinal properties.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It was taken up by
counter-culture youth
through the decades, and
cannabis got a bad name.
>> Cannabis just joins the list
as another traditional bad drug
that turns out may have
remarkable therapeutic effects.
>> That therapeutic potency
is found in the plant's active
chemicals.
They're called cannabinoids.
>> Well, there's an
awful lot of them,
and they have
terribly long names,
and so we abbreviate
them into things like CBD
for cannabidiol.
We've got a CBC.
We've got a CBN.
It's like a really
bad Scrabble hand.
>> Despite their code
acronyms, out in the field,
the cannabinoids
are quite pretty.
>> So this was originally
just a seed trial crop,
but it displays the same
sort of thing when it flowers
for the cannabinoids.
>> Right, so what part of the
plant has the cannabinoids?
>> It's all those little
crystals you can see in there.
>> So you can see--
oh yeah, they kind of
glint in the light.
>> Yeah, they
>> The number and type of
cannabinoids on a plant varies
depending on what the
crop was bred for.
>> So you've got roughly about
five to 7% cannabinoids on this
plant.
It's a seed variety, and
that's what it's designed for.
If this was a marijuana plant,
it would be mostly or 90% THC,
but this is so
minuscule in THC, it's
got room for all the
other cannabinoids
to exist on the plant.
>> THC is an acronym for
tetrahydrocannabinol.
Of the more than
100 cannabinoids,
its heady qualities have
made it the most famous.
>> THC is this bit off
the cannabis plant,
which makes you stoned.
You get a high feeling,
sort of psychoactive,
and it also impairs your
cognitive performance.
>> Despite its mind
altering effects,
THC also has potential
therapeutic applications,
particularly in pain reduction
and appetite stimulation.
Interestingly, the levels
of THC in street cannabis
have changed over
the last 40 years.
>> A couple of years ago, we
did a study with the New South
Wales police, and what we found
was that typical Australian
street cannabis has been sort
of bred or selected to produce
very high quantities of THC.
Guaranteed to get
you very intoxicated,
even with a small
amount consumed.
What was interesting
about street cannabis
was that there was
hardly any CBD.
It's the one that is
most touted as being
the good medicinal cannabinoid.
>> In yin and yang fashion,
CBD, also known as cannabidiol,
has the opposite effect to THC.
>> CBD is a really
interesting therapeutic.
It can reduce anxiety,
and there's also
evidence to show that it
has anti-inflammatory and
antioxidant effects.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Amazingly, it was only 30
years ago that we discovered
why these cannabis
compounds affect us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the '80s, a group in the
US found a receptor that THC
binds to.
This receptor is known today
as cannabinoid receptor 1.
>> There are two known
cannabinoid receptors
in the body, CB1, which
is expressed abundantly
in the brain and CB2,
present in the immune system.
Both are found in the
central nervous system.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It was Professor Mechoulam,
an early pioneer in cannabis
science, who discovered
that these receptors respond
to our very own
cannabis compounds.
They're called in
endocannabinoids.
>> Now, we know that receptors
do not exist just because there
is a plant out there.
Receptors exist to be
activated by compounds
that our body makes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There are two main
in endocannabinoids.
There's 2AG, which is the most
common one found in the brain.
There's also anandamide,
which among other places,
is found in breast milk.
>> We're still learning about
the endocannabinoid system.
It's so pervasive.
I mean, you find cannabinoids
in your testicles,
and you also find
them in your brain.
You find them in your fat.
You find them in your liver.
You find them all over
the body and brain.
So they have this kind
of multifarious role,
which is hard to pin down.
The endocannabinoid system
in very general terms
within the brain acts as a
regulator of excitability.
So if the brain's too excited,
endocannabinoids are released
and through a negative
feedback mechanism
appear to dampen
down excitability.
It can also do the
opposite, though, as well.
If the brain is
too inhibited they
can be released and actually
up regulate excitability.
So they're like a
buffering system.
>> For many years, people smoked
cannabis for its psychoactive
effects, and no one imagined
that those effects were brought
about through interaction with
the endocannabinoid system.
But it's not surprising,
because for the drugs to work,
they have to be modulating
something in the brain,
and it turned out to be a
natural cannabis system.
>> While we've learned quite
a lot about the body's natural
cannabis system, we still
don't know the specifics of how
the various molecules in
cannabis interact with
their bodies.
Well, that's what they're
trying to work out here
at the University of Sydney.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Researchers are drawing on
anecdotal community experience
with medicinal cannabis to learn
about the much touted benefit
on one specific illness,
childhood epilepsy.
>> As part of this study, I'm
traveling and visiting families
who have a child with epilepsy
who are either currently using
medicinal cannabis products,
who have previously used
and stopped for whatever reason,
or those that have never used
medicinal cannabis, but simply
want to talk a bit more about
it.
>> There's a lot of community
push for cannabis extracts
to be developed as treatments
for childhood epilepsy.
>> Thank you.
A good day was had by all.
Look at you.
Look at your little top knot.
Thank you.
Hello.
>> One of the participating
families is LJ Elwood and her
12-year-old son, Hunter.
Hunter, has Dravet syndrome,
a rare neurodevelopmental
disorder where the child
suffers intractable seizures.
Hence, it's a form of epilepsy.
>> So this one here
was when he was two.
It's just before he
deteriorated quite a lot.
He had a massive
seizure not long
after this that required
him to go into ICU
and be induced into a coma.
So yeah, that started out sort
of downhill time with him.
It's important to
control his seizures.
So that the children
don't get brain damage
or don't receive any damage to
the brain, which, of course,
with Hunter resulted in
the loss of lot of skills.
Standing, talking, sitting,
holding his head up,
feeding himself, all these
things that the children
lose through repeated seizures.
>> Despite trying every
available epilepsy medication,
nothing successfully
controlled Hunter's seizures.
>> This here is
his fifth birthday.
He was so bombed from
seizures and medications
that we had to wake
him for these photos.
And so he sat through
every one of his birthdays
until he was eight, and he
didn't participate in any.
The only recollection
he has is the photos.
For six years, he
was in the hospital.
We spent more days and nights
in hospital than we did at home.
And then when he was seven
and a half, going on to eight,
we started looking at
medicinal cannabis,
and sort of getting away
from the pharmaceutical meds
as much as we could.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> For the past four years, LJ
has been treating Hunter with
medicinal cannabis.
>> Hunter's seizures, they
decreased within 24 hours.
We saw half of them drop off.
So yeah, it was a 50%
drop straightaway.
You're in a real talkative mood.
What are you dubbing on?
>> Because Hunter can't swallow,
LJ gives him the drug via
a gastro feeding tube.
>> He became more aware of his
surroundings, more responsive.
He started recognizing people.
He started have a bit
more cognitive ability.
Freedom!
We're working really hard
at like trying to gain back
some of his skills.
So he's learned to
say mom again, which
he hadn't said in a long time.
So that was really nice,
so he says mom most days.
He'll call for me whether
he's sad, upset, or happy.
>> LJ treats Hunter with an
oil based form of cannabis.
She's taking part in the study,
because she's keen to find out
exactly what's in the product.
>> It's predominantly-- well,
hopefully predominantly CBD
and THCA, but I'm not too
sure what else is in there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think it's exciting
to see what's
in everybody's supply they have.
I want to see why it's
working, how it's working.
There were some
children aren't showing
any positive effect to
it and others that are,
so I want to know why.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> And the researchers
are keen to know, too.
So they're taking LJ's
and other community
sourced tinctures
and oils to the lab
to find out exactly
what's in them.
>> We're looking at ways
that we can harness the power
of what's already happening
in the community and back
translate some of the signals
to the lab and learn more about
the fundamental mechanisms that
may be therapeutically useful
with cannabis.
>> So there's THC.
>> Gee, it's quite yellow.
>> Yeah, in comparison to CBD,
it's actually very yellow.
>> It's the cannabis compound
CBD that's thought to have
the positive effect in epilepsy,
but there are many other so far
unexplored cannabinoids
that may also play a role.
>> So there is THC and
CBD, THCV, THCVA, THCA.
>> I think of it as
a treasure trove.
We're not quite sure what
the treasuries are yet.
>> CBL, CBLA.
>> The ones that we don't
really know a lot about yet,
they're the ones that might
be real wonder molecules.
>> CBN, CBNA, CBNVA, CNA.
Sorry, it's CVA.
Just cut there.
That was enough.
>> Now that's a woman who
knows her cannabinoids.
>> We have some samples from
the actual PELICAN study.
It shows predominantly
two cannabinoids,
as you can tell by the
height of the peaks.
>> So basically, these
are cannabinoids.
>> Yes, you know, when we
looked at a broad scale,
you can only see two.
But when you
highlight them, there
are actually significant
amounts of other cannabinoids.
They're just kind of
drowned out by how
concentrated the other two are.
>> So the ones that
have the biggest,
broadest peaks aren't
necessarily the ones with
the medical value.
>> Right.
So that's what we're
trying to figure out.
We're trying to see even
if some of the ones that
are low concentration
might be working
at that low concentration.
>> We've noticed that the
amounts of THC in it is
actually quite low.
>> It's early days yet
with the PELICAN study,
but we're not seeing a lot of
THC, which is a good thing,
because we don't want these
children to be intoxicated.
>> This means it would have a
negligible psychoactive effect
on hunter.
>> Oh, good.
Good to know.
>> The surprising thing so far
is that we're not seeing a lot
of CBD, and we've kind of
assumed the CBD would be very
prominent, because there already
is a fair literature on CBD
having anti-convulsant effects.
So that throws a
spotlight on a whole bunch
of more obscure cannabinoids.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're starting to do work
with cells and with mice
to try and link some of
these more novel cannabinoids
to anti-convulsive effects.
>> The researchers are using
mice that have been genetically
engineered to have a condition
similar to Dravet syndrome,
the form of epilepsy Hunter has.
So they're actually quite a good
model for the human condition.
>> Oh, yeah.
They're an excellent model.
They exhibit seizures
in association
with fever,
spontaneous seizures,
and a reduced lifespan.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we will treat the mice
with the cannabinoids,
and then we will induce a fever.
We'll raise the mouse's
body temperature.
>> So you will give them
different kinds of cannabinoids
to see what effect
they have on that.
>> We're looking for the
cannabinoid that is most
effective at preventing the
thermally induced seizures,
and then ultimately, eventually
the spontaneous seizures.
>> And is it the case that
some could work together?
>> Oh, that's
definitely the case,
which is why we'll test
them in combination.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> It's still very early days
in this preclinical work.
With no available data yet, but
along with reducing seizures,
they're hoping to also
have an effect on lifespan.
>> This is what's seen in
Dravet children as well.
There's sudden death
that can occur.
It affects about
16% of the children.
So if we can reduce
that mortality rate,
that would be a
major achievement.
>> What we're really hoping will
come out of that is some novel
anti-convulsant that there is
a cannabinoid that is yet to be
characterized, yet to be
identified there is an even
better anti-convulsant
than CBD is.
And we're working furiously
on that at the moment.
>> That's the hope
for the future.
But right now, in
the clinical world,
the focus is still on CBD.
Childhood epilepsy is a
condition Professor Ingrid
Scheffer treats every day.
>> Do you have a doggy at home?
>> She's eager for more
effective therapies for her
patients.
>> So you may see a child
that's tried six different
anti-epileptic drugs.
None of them have worked.
They still have
seizures every day.
And we're all very
desperate to try and find
a drug that can
control their seizures.
I get asked about medicinal
cannabis sometimes six times
a day.
>> Professor Scheffer is at
pains to tell them that right
now, there's not
much good evidence.
>> We need very well-designed,
randomized, double blind,
placebo controlled trials.
And once we have
those answers, they
will tell us if medicinal
cannabis is effective,
And then I will be delighted
to use it if it is effective
if it helps the patients.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Be as you can, Lachie.
>> Finally, these gold standard
clinical trials are happening,
including here in Australia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This trial is testing that
familiar cannabinoid, CBD,
in adults with
unresponsive epilepsy.
>> Make sure you
squeeze it all out.
We want to make sure
you get the whole dose.
Rub it in quite hard, really
vigorously, up and down,
up and down.
>> 25-year-old Lachie
Davidson is part of the trial.
>> Trying to get
used to it is all.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> It comes as a gel rubbed
into the skin twice a day,
which gives a controlled release
of CBD into the bloodstream.
>> This is just a blood test to
determine how much of the drug
is in your bloodstream.
It's important information
in determining what
sort of doses people will get.
>> Lachie's been a patient of
Professor Scheffer's since he
was eight.
>> He has an
unusual brain tumor,
very rare one called a
hypothalamic hematoma.
You just feel like you
missed something, do you--
Which is a benign type
of more, but it's also
right deep in the clockwork in
the hypothalamus of the brain.
And it's classically associated
with this very rare form
of seizures called
laughing seizures.
And so the person has
this merciless laughter
several times a day for Lachie.
But on top of that, he
has more severe seizures,
where he loses awareness,
and he's not with it.
So you're in the trial now.
Tell us how it's going.
>> It seems to be
going OK, I think.
>> What I did notice is that
the seizures are lasting four
to five minutes, which is
less than they were before.
But this time, he's
going sound asleep.
>> Over most of my life, I've
been having seizures at least
once every two, three days.
Here you go.
Glad I can teach you.
I'm not able to travel far
without requiring somebody
to aid me.
Unfortunately, the meds I
have taken for a long time
give me a problem with
my grasp on words.
It doesn't help, because I used
to be a pretty good debater,
and so when I started taking
a larger dose of medication,
it has made me struggle
with some words.
>> You must find that very
frustrating, I'm guessing.
>> Very.
See that's cheating.
You looked.
This will be my eighth attempt
at finding a medication
to control my epilepsy.
>> So he's better
at the end of it.
>> At the end of it, he
was completely alert.
It's wonderful.
>> I think it's really important
that we acknowledge that
you've only been on the
trial for two weeks.
And so two weeks is nothing yet.
We really can't
make any judgment.
And this could just be
your natural history.
So it's always hard to
tell if a new drug makes
a difference until you have
a longer time to play out.
We also don't know if
you're on placebo or on drug
at this stage.
>> This trial still
has some months to go,
but a similar one overseas,
using the same compound, CBD,
is showing great promise for
children with Dravet syndrome.
>> And they showed a median
reduction of seizures of 40%,
convulsive seizures, in the
children compared with 9%
in placebo, of placebo cases.
So that is the first real
evidence we have that it works,
and that's fantastic.
It is important to note that
40% is about the same as some
of our anti-epileptic
therapies as well.
So it's not better,
but it's not worse,
and it's going to
be great to have
it to add to the range of
drugs we can give our patients.
>> It's possible this CBD drug
for epilepsy will be available
in the US at least in 2018.
Back here in Australia,
a surprising application
for cannabis is
being investigated.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Although there have
been no human trials,
there are anecdotal reports
of relatives treating
Alzheimer's patients
with cannabis
and it having great effect.
>> They were more alert.
They could recognize
that parents again.
They started playing
the piano again,
which they hadn't done in years.
These are obviously
only case reports,
but they are promising,
and they, in my opinion,
justified that we continue
this research in this area.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Now, the researchers here
don't think it's the whole
plant that might do the trick.
Rather, they think it's that
key ingredient, again, CBD.
And they found some really
interesting results with mice.
>> We are one of the first
groups in the world to work
with live mice.
These mice have been
genetically modified.
This means, over time, they
develop an Alzheimer's disease
like phenotype,
which means they also
develop cognitive deficits.
>> The mice are treated either
with a controlled substance
or with CBD.
They then undergo a
variety of cognitive tests.
So what's going on in this test?
>> So this test is what we
call a cheese spot test.
It tests spatial
memory in animals.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A hungry mouse learns
over time that the same well
contains a food reward.
>> So it's exploring the maze.
It also looks at external cues.
>> That's those
triangles, crosses--
>> Triangles, crosses,
geometric figures,
and it just tries to work out
where the food reward might be.
The test is repeated
over a number of days.
>> Animals with cognitive
deficits can't find
or can't remember this
food reward very well,
and therefore takes them longer
to find this food reward.
>> The effect on the CBD
treated mice was striking.
>> We've found that both
preventative and also
in a remedial setup, CBD
can prevent the onset
of the cognitive symptoms and
can also reverse cognitive
symptoms once they have
developed in these mice.
>> Despite the strong findings,
the team needs to do further
work with mice before any
clinical trials can start.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But here at St
Vincent's in Sydney,
a very real world trial of
cannabis is taking place.
Another one of the potential
uses for medical cannabis
is helping patients
in palliative care,
specifically to help
them with pain reduction
and to increase their appetites.
Now, a particular cannabinoid
thought to be involved in this
is THC.
And Australia's about to
start one of the largest
clinical trials in the world
with terminally ill cancer
patients.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Good.
Yes, it is 120/17.
>> Really?
>> So you're spot on.
Yes, you are.
That's very good.
>> 82-year-old Ruth Candelle
has terminal colon cancer and is
a potential trial candidate.
>> It makes you forget.
It makes you feel like
you have a bit of energy
or you feel you can do things,
even though the body may not
be ready to do that.
So I would like to invite
you to be part of this trial.
I can provide you with lots of
information about the trial.
I think the hardest part
is being in hospital
for about eight days.
>> I'm already there.
>> Yes, you are.
>> A lot of patients tell me
cannabis helps them forget,
forget they're in bad pain,
make them feel better.
>> But as a doctor, Richard Chye
needs evidence-based guidelines
before he can recommend it.
>> I need to understand what
is in the medicinal cannabis,
how much THC, CBD.
I need to know what it
will do, what it won't do.
I need to know its side effects.
I need to know what
dose I can prescribe.
>> This trial is using raw
cannabis that's high in THC
and imported from
the Netherlands.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is the device
we will be using.
It's called a mini vape.
>> It'll be delivered
through a vaporizer,
which heats the cannabis
to around 200 degrees.
>> This is where the
cannabis will be put into it,
so it's a little mesh thimble.
>> So it's just
the crushed leaf.
>> It's just the crushed leaf
and flower that we want to put
in here.
>> To monitor cannabis levels,
the participants need to have
blood taken regularly.
>> Can I be very honest?
>> Please do.
>> I think it's
an excellent idea.
I have an issue
with a blood test.
>> Yes.
>> That's my problem.
>> OK
>> Very hard to get my veins.
That is the only reason
I would reject it.
Otherwise, I'm a great
believer in new ideas,
because if you don't have
a new idea, you stagnate.
And actually, if you don't,
you're going backwards.
>> Unfortunately, there are
plenty of other potential
candidates.
So the trial no doubt
will soon be under way.
>> You know the
word scaredy cat?
>> Yes.
>> That's where I'm coming from.
>> That's fine.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The results of the clinical
trials won't be known for some
time, but for those dealing
with currently untreatable
conditions, they
hold great promise.
>> That's why I'm such a
big supporter of medicinal
cannabis, because I want
children to have access to this
from a very young age.
So they don't lose
the skills like my son
did because once the damage
is done, it's permanent.
>> I think trials are
incredibly important,
because it could be that magic
bullet for that child that
could stop their seizures, and
if you can stop the seizures,
you can help their development.
And if you can help
their development,
you can improve the
long term outcome,
which is a life changer.
[MUSIC PLAYING]